This is chapter 13 in our series of short stories in relation to the race riots in Wales in 1919.
Chapter 13 is actually the 1919 race riots in Liverpool. This podcast is drawn from a film
produced and directed by Hatch TV made in partnership with WALW, Writing on the Wall,
and the Geography Department of Liverpool University. It is narrated by Jannia Pickett
and we're grateful to them for giving their permission for us to use this within our project.
Today this area of Liverpool forms a vibrant and diverse community whose many cultures live
peacefully side by side. Here in the Baltic Triangle there is a thriving creative industry,
but in 1919 things were very different and these streets witnessed unprecedented racial violence,
bloodshed and murder. This short film looks at some of the people and places featured in
the Great Water Race Riot Archive which can be explored online and in a book available from
Writing on the Wall.
In 1919, as today, the city's diverse population reflected its long heritage as a thriving port.
The area around Chinatown and the Baltic Triangle was known as Sailor Town and was populated by
black, Chinese, Scandinavian, Russian, Ukrainian and Italian seafarers.
During World War I, industries in Liverpool that had traditionally shunned black workers
welcomed men from West Africa and the Caribbean to fill the wartime labour shortage.
Many worked as merchant seamen and in factories. At the end of the war, black men found themselves
out of work when a colour bar in employment was reintroduced. They were blamed for the post-war
economic slump and, backed by the local press, the mayor of Liverpool, John Ritchie,
sought to repatriate the city's black workers.
Throughout the summer of 1919, racial violence erupted in seaports throughout the UK.
On the 4th of June, John Johnson, a West Indian man who lived here at 48 Nelson Street,
was brutally stabbed by two Scandinavian men for refusing to give them a cigarette.
The following evening, Johnson's friends retaliated by attacking a group of Scandinavians
at a pub on Bailey Street. This sparked a wave of racial violence against black people by white mobs
in their thousands. On the 5th of June, police raided 18 Upper Pitt Street. A young Bermuda
sailor, Charles Watton, was at home and leave during the raid. Charles fled the house and was
chased by the police and an angry mob.
Charles was pursued here to Queen's Dock, where he was either pushed or fell into the water.
Under the hail of missiles, Charles was hit unconscious on the head with a rock and drowned.
Violence intensified over the next few nights with thousands of people attacking black homes
and boarding houses. Hundreds of black men and their families were housed in police stations
for their own safety. Following the riots, the Chief Constable of Liverpool and the Queen's
Home Office made plans for the repatriation of black colonial workers.
The Killing of Charles and the Race Riot of 1919 stand as a landmark event and watershed
for Britain's black community.